---
layout: post
title:  "Why comma.ai is a great company"
date:   2021-10-06
categories: Companies
---

Comma.ai is a great company that nobody talks about. 

&nbsp;

Founded in 2015 by George Hotz, the company design/built/sells electronic hardware (i.e. commas) which is attached to the dashboard of a passenger car via a harness. Slapping down $2000, the driver enjoys a vastly superior driver assistance system than what is provided by the OEM. (Currently they support more than 140 car models). Openpilot is an open source software that runs on their hardware. 

&nbsp;

I learned about comma when I was doing research in the autonomous driving space sometime around 2019. I remember the company left an impression one me since she was taking a radically different approach from any other company that I looked into. Primarily, I was shocked that an autonomous driving company would open source their software; it felt like a magician spoiling all his tricks throughout the show. (I didn't know Penn and Teller back then!) I was also skeptical that someone can attach a smartphone-size device, priced at $1000 (for the early comma) on their dashboard and make it drive itself, while other companies were pouring in BILLIONS of $$$ to do the same thing. Boy was I wrong. 

&nbsp;

I want to first point out to my past-self that POURING MONEY INTO A PROJECT MEANS JACK**** in tech. The most notable example is the Wright brothers. The Wright brothers were two brilliant bike mechanics from Dayton, Ohio who solved controlled human flight at a budget of roughly $2000 (at early 20th century value). Their key breakthrough was the invention of the 3-axis control system, which was adopted by all subsequent planes. All the money for the project came from the revenue generated by the bike shop they owned. 

&nbsp;

In contrast to the Wright brothers is Samuel Langley, a professor of astronomy at the University of Pittsburgh. Being an aviation fanatic, he eventually did built a plane that can fly, but the pilot had no means of control. Also, he spent roughly $300,000 (also at early 20th century value!). This is the reason why NASA named a research center in his honor and not a single center is named after the two nobodies from Ohio. 

&nbsp;

Comma seems like the Wright brothers; a small team of brilliant engineers taking a practical approach to solving an audacious technical problem, funding their efforts using the sales from their hardware (shippable intermediaries). Waymo, Cruise, and the rest of them seem like Samuel Langley. Taking huge chunks of money to built a complicated and bloated technology which ended up not working that great (if at all). 

&nbsp;

So what makes comma.ai special? 

&nbsp;

First, its their technology. Comma has defined self-driving as a system which, given a scene from the dashboard, the car places itself where a human driver would most likely drive. This approach is different from Tesla that labels and feeds information of the environment to "robotically" steer the car such that there is no conflict in pathways with nearby cars. The difference in the approach stems from Tesla approaching self-driving as an path optimization problem, while comma approaches it as a statistics problem. Its worth noting here that the number of employees between the two companies are *vastly* different (Tesla: 70,700 vs comma: 20-ish) that Tesla's approach requiring large number of man hours and infrastructure for data labeling just isn't viable for a small company like comma. 

&nbsp;

Doing a deep-dive in the difference in engineering decisions made in the two companies would be super interesting, but I currently don't have the expertise to run such a rigorous analysis. But it seems that compared to comma, Tesla's approach is less transferable to other real-world AI problems, since the model needs information of the environment like stop signs, traffic lights, and cones fed into it. It's also been pointed out by George Hotz that the placement of the vehicle inside a lane in a Tesla feels unnatural compared to a human driver. Whatever the differences are, both companies are pursing an end-to-end solution based on vision only. Both are building what users *really* want. However, it seems they have defined their users' needs differently. 

&nbsp;

Second, its their business model. Tesla sells cars and Comma sells electronic hardware. Understanding that Tesla's mission is to accelerate the world into a renewable future, its still worth noting that the automotive industry runs on a slim profit margin (10%-20%) compared to other industries, like pharmaceuticals (70%+), electronics (30%-50%), and software (40%-80%). Electric cars exasperate this trend due to the high raw material costs; at a low price point the profit margin becomes *laser* thin. I think Tesla will slowly pivot away from building electric cars to high margin businesses like energy storage, processors, and manufacturing equipment throughout the coming decades. Anyways, comma has placed herself in a good market. 

&nbsp;

Its also worth noting that comma's decision to open source their software doesn't impede their business but rather enhances it. The comma team only supports the top five car models; all other models that they support, totalling 130, is done by the community of users. If a car model is not supported, a user can use a tool provided by comma to add support, which is shared with the entire community. Understanding their business deeper, it wouldn't make sense *not* to open source their software. 

&nbsp;

Not to mention that robo-taxis are a horrible business model. A fleet of self-driving cars costing $100,000+ a pop picking up people going grocery shopping is **not a high margin business**. It also comes with a logistics nightmare of *excess* capacity for majority of the day and *lack* of capacity during peak hours, leading to terrible user experience while bleeding money.  Even if they solve full-self driving, robo-taxi businesses still have massive technical challenges to overcome until they start generating revenue. Then, they need to recover their R/D costs *spanning up to and beyond a decade*, until they can finally start investing their profits to scale their business. Its a really long pathway to achieve zero fatalities on the road. Tesla and comma just don't have to deal with these problems.

&nbsp;

My point of this post is that I think comma.ai should be studied as a textbook example of how to build a great company. **Everything about the company makes sense!** How the technology and business model come together enhancing each other. How to build something better by delivering products to customers and investing revenue. How a small team can take on a hard technical challenge by taking a clever approach. 

&nbsp;

So here's the takeaway: create an environment where you can focus on solving problems that matter. The shortest path to solving big problems is by generating revenue and scaling. And if you need to borrow billions of $$$ to generate revenue, you are probably wrong in a big way. 